Welcome back to this discussion on useful operators.
There are many useful operators and built in functions that we haven't really had a chance to discuss
yet.
This lesson is going to serve as that chance to catch up and explain these few concepts that didn't
really fit perfectly into the other previous topics we'll discuss useful operations as well as some
built in functions.
Let's open up a Jupiter notebook and show you what we're talking about.
The first thing that we're going to discuss is the range function and the range function allows you
to quickly generate a list of integers.
This comes in handy a lot so take note of how to use it.
Let's imagine that I want to iterate through a list of 100 so 100 integers from 0 to 100.
Well one option would just be to say for number or numb in and then I would have to create that list.
One two three.
All the way to 100.
That's a lot of typing for me to do.
So instead of doing that what I can use is the range function and the range function takes in your starting
index and then the index you want to go up to and recall from slicing we went up to an index but did
not include it.
So if I want to print out the numbers from 0 to 10 I'm going to go up to 11.
That is not including 11 so 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 up to 11 and then I'm going to print the number and
here it can see 0 1 2 3 etc. all the way to 10 and similar to slicing.
There's actually a step argument we can provide as well.
So if we want to just go and jumps of two I can provide a third argument to and that's the upsized So
this is a way to quickly get even numbers or if I wanted for example to take a step size of 5 and go
all the way to 100 I could do from 0 up to that including 101 in of 5 Preta all the numbers.
So now I can see I've printed out five five 10 15 20 etc. all the way to 100.
So that's really useful for iterating.
And what is really nice about this is that it's actually a generator.
So this is not saving a list in memory.
It's basically just saving out a formula.
And the previous number.
So it remembers that you're starting at 0 and it needs to add 5 to get to the next number instead of
having to save a huge list and memory that way in case this is a really large number maybe 10 million
or 100 million.
It's not saving 100 million elements in memory instead it's saving the formula go from 0 5 up to whatever
number this is.
So because this is what we call a generator and it's essentially saving that formula.
If we actually just call range by itself let's make this number a little more manageable.
And we'll go ahead and delete the step size.
If we just say range 0 to 10 and hit enter here we just get back range 0 to 10.
And if I try to print this out I will get the exact same thing.
Range is worth 10 if I actually want to get a list and generate the full list.
I will need to transform this by passing it into list and notice the amount of princes I'm using here.
One is for range the starting and the ending.
So this would be 0 3 9 and then we see the list and then we see print.
And now I can see 0 up to but not including 10.
So then I get nine.
That's the range function it's very useful.
Another very useful function especially for for loops is the enumerate function.
Let's say we are going to iterate through a string we say four letter N and then I will say A B C D
E.
Print the letter.
So here you see A B C D E.
Imagine that I also want to print the index that corresponds to each of these letters.
What I could do is the following I could say index is equal to zero and then say prints a letter and
I will actually use some formatting here I will say that's index curly braces the letter is curly braces
and the string say that format and I'm going to essentially inject the index the letter and then off
of index I'm going to set that equal to index plus 1.
So what I have here it says at index 0 of the letters A One letters B etc..
So I start off with the index being equal to zero.
And then for every letter in the string ABC the E and going to be using print formatting to print out
the index and the letter variable.
And then once this is printed I will go ahead and add one to the index and as quick no.
Since this sort of action is really common.
Adding one or subtracting one or even multiplying a variable by its previous value.
The shorthand for a variable is equal to the variable plus it's some other value is the following.
Instead of saying index equal to index plus 1 I could just say plus equals and that's actually the exact
same thing.
So then when I run that I get back the same result.
So that's a shorthand.
Now there's even a better way of doing this.
And that uses the enumerate function that I was just discussing.
So let's see how we could do this with enumeration.
How we'll say for and then we'll will use tuple in packing that we discussed earlier and there is essentially
a count variable return than this as well as a letter or whatever you happen to choose as a temporary
variable name.
And then we can say enumerates a b c d e and then I could essentially use the exact same thing.
So I will copy this case this and we can actually instead of using count we can use index.
Again you can call these variable names whatever you want.
And then when we run this we get back the exact same result.
So what is actually happening with enumerate.
Well let's grab it and pass it into a list so we can see the result will say list pasand enumerate ABC
run that.
And notice what's happening.
It's generating a list of tuples where the first item in the tuple is a numerical count.
This sort of operation is really common as you begin to program in Python where you're going to want
to not only iterate through some sort of list or string or any sort of iterable object but you're also
going to want to keep a count of where you are at and enumerate is a very convenient way to do that.
And especially when combined with tuple and packing you have a really powerful piece of code all nicely
in one line.
So if the numerate function you're able to create a list of tuples where the first item in the tuple
is the count of what stage you're at the iterable and then the second item is iterable itself.
So you could also do enumerate with not just a string but you could also do a list.
So you could say a b c run that and you would get the exact same thing.
So notice that this works for any sort of iterable object you get back an index of the letter.
And it works the same way as you begin to learn more about Python you'll start to realize that this
sort of list of tuple format is actually really useful and maybe you're going to have multiple lists
that you want to zip together or join together in this sort of format where you can do that easily with
the zip function.
So I will create two lists here.
My last one which is going to be the numbers 1 2 3 4 5 and then I will create my list too which will
be a series of letters we will say A B C D and we want to make sure they match up so good.
So right now I have my list one and my list too if I want to join these together in order to have tuples
of these pairs one a to b three See what I could do is use the zip function and say my list 1 my list
too.
And then I can actually iterate through this.
So now I can say for item in Ziph my list on my list to print the item and notice what happens here.
It's actually creating a list of tuples based off these lists.
And let's imagine if I'd said zip up my list to my list to then I would just get a B B C C C C what
I can also do is if I just want the list itself I can transform the result of that list or that zip
function by passing and list again zip.
All it does is essentially acting like a zipper on a jacket and zipping together these lists.
You'll want to keep in mind though if you have more items in one list.
So let's make my list one.
Longer than my list too.
And if we try to run this here you'll only go as far as the shorter list so you won't get an error but
you'll only go as far as the shorter list so when it's zipping up it's going to cut off anything else
in the other list that's longer.
Keep that in mind as you use the zip function the next.
Operator we're going to discuss the in operator.
We've already seen the in operator here in the context of a for loop but you can also use it just outside
of a for loop to check for something being inside a list.
So we can say X in the list 1 to 3 and it will all turn back a boolean false because the string x is
not in this list.
And we can also check if X is and this list will say a comma B come a C and this returns false.
But let's change one of these to be x.
And now we can see it's true.
It actually also works for any iterable object and they all work for strings as well so we can say a
b c d e that returns false.
Will say is X an A C X and we get back true.
Essentially it's kind of a shorthand of a quick for loop check to see if this object is in any of the
iterable elements of a string or a list or really a sort of iterable sequence.
So again that's the in operator.
Hopefully you can see how it's related to the in operator use in a for loop such as sucking If something
is in some iterable object.
Next up we want to discuss the min and max function that is going to lie to quickly check the minimum
or maximum of a list.
So if I create a list 10 20 30 40 100 I can use mine.
Notice how their syntax highlighting there that can grow quickly the minimum of a list or can say grab
the maximum of a list and it turns back 100 Python also comes with a built in random library.
There's lots of functions including the random library.
We're just going to show you two useful functions for now and that is the shuffle function as well as
the random integer function and to import particular functions from the a random library.
You can say from random imports and then if you hit tab here you should be able to see a bunch of options
that you can import.
We're going to import shuffle from the random library we'll save from random import shuffle.
And this means now that we imported shuffle function from the random library that's built into Python.
We'll discuss this syntax and a lot more detail when discussing creating your own modules or own packages.
For now let's go ahead and see how we can use this shuffle library shuffle allows you to shuffle the
list in place meaning it's not going to return anything.
Instead it's going to affect the lists that you pass into it.
So before I actually run this I'm going to show you my list which is an order and then I'm going to
call shuffle on my list and the shuffle is happening in place meaning if I check my list again it's
been permanently shuffled into some other order.
And then I can also reshuffle it again my list and it's not going to be shuffled in some other random
order.
So now 20 10 40 100 etc..
So that's how you can use shuffle.
The other function we want to show you from random is the rand I.A. or random integer function and you
can import that as well and say it ran I.A. and this returns a random integer in range a to b which
include in both end points.
So I can grab a random number from 0 to 100 and then I'll return a number from 0 to 100.
Here I could see 30.
Let's go ahead and run it again 53 46 and you can keep running this and you'll get random numbers and
you can make the range even larger to make it more obvious that they're random.
For now let's wrap up our discussion by quickly discussing comparison operators and logical operators.
We've already talked about comparison operators but it's formally just go over them.
Comparison operators like to compare two objects so I can say is one less than two.
And I get back a boolean value.
More importantly we can also check for equality.
Second check is one equal to one that returns true.
You have to also has to be the same data type so I can say is the string one equal to the integer 1.
And that will return false and for inequality it's going to be exclamation mark or exclamation point
equals and then that's not equal to 1 not equal to 2.
Well that's true.
It is not equal to two.
So those are comparison operators and you can look back at the previous lessons to see what we discussed
about other things such as greater than less than greater than or equal to etc..
But let's imagine that we now know about comparison operators but want to combine multiple comparisons.
We can use logical operators in order to do that.
And there's essentially three major logical operators there is the and key word the or key word.
And then the not key word.
Let's start off by looking at and sort of say one is equal to one and two is equal to two.
Now when I run the cell I get back.
True.
So what's actually happening here.
The end keyword requires that both statements be true in order for it to return true.
So let's make one of these false by saying two is not equal to two.
And when I run this I get back false.
So that's the and keyword.
And you can also keep adding on more.
So we can say and three to three.
So if we change this to all be equal we end up getting true.
However we should be careful to stack up to many of these especially because it makes your code a lot
longer and it's then becomes more difficult to track out your logic.
So that's the key word.
There's also the or key word in this case.
It's going to need one of the statements to be true.
So we can say is one equal to 1 or is two not equal to 2.
And this returns true because the first one happens to be true even though this second one is not true.
So to make it more obvious is if we say is one equal to one or two equal to 100 He only needs one of
these conditions to be true to operate.
Finally we have the knot's operator and the not operator can be thought of as reversing the boolean
it's given.
So if we have one is equal to one that returns true if we write the key word not in front of it it will
say false.
Essentially reversing the boolean it's given.
So let's show you a more realistic example of when you may want to use this.
We will say answer is equal to no.
And then we'll say if one is equal to 1 and not answer equal to yes.
Prince success.
So when I read this I see success because what's actually happening here I'm checking this condition
first.
If one is equal to 1.
Well that happens to be true.
And the answer is not equal to.
Yes.
That I predict success.
The answer was no.
I get back success in other way.
Do this is instead of using a keyword just to use an exclamation mark.
And that's the exact same thing.
All right those are a bunch of operators that you may find yourself using.
Hopefully they were helpful to you in your studies.
Thanks and we'll see you at the next lesson.